Objectifs:

/***************** Scéance 1: ************************/

faire le tri parmi les sujets dispos...
En choisir 1.
p.ex natures des intéractions entre sucres et protéines...
drug design galectines
pistes de voies thérapeutiques : en modifiant protéine ou substrat...

######################
définition galectine :
Galectins are abundant, distributed widely around the body and have some distinct functions.

WIKIPEDIA:
Apoptosis:
	can regulate cell death both intracellularly and extracellularly.
	Extracellularly, they cross link glycans on the outside of cells and transduce signals across the membrane to directly cause cell death or activate downstream signalling that triggers 	    apoptosis.
	Intracellularly, they can directly regulate proteins that control cell fate (destinée cellulaire).
	Some ways to regulate apoptosis:
		 To control positive and negative selection of T cells in the thymus. Both galectin-1 and galectin-9 are secreted by epithelial cells in the thymus and mediate T cell apoptosis. Galectin-1 binds many proteins on the T cell surface, but specifically CD7, CD43 and CD45 are involved in apoptosis.
		 Galectin-7 may have a key role in regulating apoptosis of keratinocytes after DNA damage, such as that caused by UV radiation.
		 Galectin-12 expression induces apoptosis of adipocytes.
		 Galectin-3 has been shown to be the only galectin with anti-apoptotic activity. Intracellulary, can associate with Bcl-2 proteins : anti-apoptotic family, and thus may enhance Bcl-2 binding to the target cell.
		 Galectin-3 can also be pro-apoptotic and mediate T cell and neutrophil death.
		 
Suppression of T-cell receptor activation :
	Essential role in negatively regulating T cell receptor (TCR) activation.
	Galectins have been proven to act as chemoattractants to immune cells and activate secretion of inflammatory cytokines.
		 
Adhesion :
	Can both promote and inhibit integrin-mediated adhesion.
	Enhancement : they cross link between two glycans on different cells. This brings the cells closer together so integrin binding occurs.
	Inibition   : by binding to two glycans on the same cell, which blocks the integrin binding site.

Nuclear pre-miRNA splicing :
	Galectin-1 and galectin-3 : associate with nuclear ribonucleoprotein complexes including the spliceosome. They are required splicing factors.
	It appears that the splicing capability of galectins is independent of their sugar-binding specificities.
	
Implication in Cancers :
	Galectin-3 : 
		Best understood galectin in cancers.
		A considerable part in processes linked to tumorigenesis.
		It interacts with oncogenes such as Ras and activates downstream signalling that promotes proliferation.
		Can also regulate some of the proteins of the cell cycle, such as cyclin E and c-myc, which may give it additional tumorigenic properties.
		Bound to glycans on the surface of breast cancer cells.
		Also binds to MUC-1, a very large transmembrane mucin, which on cancer cells changes expression from long core 2 type O-glycosylation to shorter core 1 type O-glycosylation.
		Other studies showing that inhibition of galectin-3 in human breast cancer cells lose their malignancy in vitro. --> This may provide a clue towards developing therapeutics for cancer, such as galactin-3 inhibitors.
		
Implication in HIV :
	Galectin-1 : enhance HIV infection due to its galactose binding specificity.
	HIV is a virus that infects CD4+ cells via binding of its viral envelope glycoprotein complex, which consists of gp120 and gp41.
	The gp120 glycoprotein contains two types of N-glycan, high mannose oligomers and N-acetyllactosamine chains on a trimannose core.
	The N-acetyllactosamine chains are ligands for galectin-1 (expressed in the thymus).
	In its normal function, galectin-1 binds to glycans on the CD4 co-receptor of T cells to prevent auto reactivity.
	When HIV is present, the galectin bridges between the CD4 co-receptor and gp120 ligands, thus facilitating HIV infection of the T cell.
	A galectin-1 inhibitor can be used in conjunction with antiretroviral drugs to decrease the infectivity of the HIV and increase the efficacy of the drug.
		
		
	
NCBI chapter 33:
Voir les 2 .ppt téléchargés.
Galectins typically bind β-galactose-containing glycoconjugates 
and share primary structural homology in their carbohydrate-recognition domains (CRDs). 
Previously termed S-type lectins, 
galectins represent a group of proteins that are the most widely expressed class of lectins in all organisms. 
This chapter describes the diversity of the galectin family and presents an overview of what is known about their biosynthesis, secretion, and biological activities.

It was originally described in 1975 during studies on the possible presence of lectins in the electric organs of the electric eel.


UNIPROT :
Fonction: 
	May regulate apoptosis, cell proliferation and cell differentiation. 
	Binds beta-galactoside and a wide array of complex carbohydrates. 
	Inhibits CD45 protein phosphatase activity and therefore the dephosphorylation of Lyn kinase.

Tissue expression : 
	Expressed in placenta, maternal decidua and fetal membranes. 
	Within placenta, expressed in trophoblasts, stromal cells, villous endothelium, syncytiotrophoblast apical membrane and villous stroma. 
	Within fetal membranes, expressed in amnion, chorioamniotic mesenchyma and chorion (at protein level). 
	Expressed in cardiac, smooth, and skeletal muscle, neurons, thymus, kidney and hematopoietic cells.


	
POINT VIN TRAN:
Les prot associées aux sucres: lectines. les galectins sont une sous-catégorie : en relation avec des beta-galactosides.
Prolifération de maladies suivant la nature de la maladie --> galectin sont sur-exprimées, et favorisent la maladie, notamment la prolifération
Molécule naturelle -> ne pas l'éradiquer. mais des contextes font que le mécanisme déraille.
En terme médical : détéction de ces galectin en signe pronostique de maladies --> Coté diagnostic. 
Si on arrive à diminuer le taux de ces protéines de façon artificielle, alors la maladie ne progresse pas aussi vite (dur a faire dans l'organisme humain : on peut pas en empecher sa sécretion). -> trouver des inibiteur de la fixation des ces galactin avec leurs lignads naturelles. -> plus d'activité indésirable.

Plusieurs types de galectins, essayer de trouver des inibiteurs spécifiques de ces galectins, avec des spécifités encore plus forte que le ligand naturel.
Panoplie d'inhibiteurs, les tester in silico. Puis synthétisation par des biologistes...
Savoir si ttes les galectines ont les memes sites catalytiques. On pourrait donc faire des inhibiteurs génériques ou spécifiques de ces galectins.
-> comparaison des galectins.
Inhibiteur : énergie qu'il ya derrière : c'est le maitre mot en modelisation moléculaire.
A chaque fois qu'il y a un ligand avec un prot, on cherche la nature des intéraction (hydrophobes,...). -> Identifier les forces de l'intéraction.
Identifier des molécules qui peuvent rentrer dans le site de fixation.

Y a t-il de la place pour mettre autre chose. Quel type de molécule va-t-il falloir modifier pour qu'elle puisse perturber le mécanisme naturel.

Ressemblances entre galectin 1 et 3 ?
3 et 7 ?
Articles donnent des molécules suspectées d'avoir une affinité pour ces galectins...

OBJECTIFS :
--> Un projet binome se restreint à une de ces pbmtiques :
Trouver la bonne molécule qui rentre.
Vérifier que cette molécule a + d'affinité.
Modifier cette molécule pour trouver LE BON médicament.

Est-ce que les sites de galactosidases ressemblent à ceux des galectins.


SUJET 1:
Galectin 3 semble la plus documentée.
Comparer la 1 et la  3 (aa impliqués dans le binding...).
Trouver un ligand pour la 3. (etat des lieux).
Faire du drug diseign sur ce ligang pour le pied-de-bicher dans la 1 -> repress HIV. ("A galectin-1 inhibitor can be used in conjunction with antiretroviral drugs to decrease the infectivity of the HIV and increase the efficacy of the drug.")


Biblio:
Où la g.1 est elle impliquée?
Etat des lieux ligand g1 et g3.
Idem structures 3D.
Intéraction HIV-g1-Tcell.

SUJET 2:
Protéine de fusion entre ligand galectin et un activateur de la protéolise extra ou intra (?).

Biblio :

SUJET 3:

